                            End Game Hints
                       by slater@nrlssc.navy.mil

Okay, Cretin:  You've taken the easy way out and consulted this file
about the end game.  You obviously have no shame - something which makes
you a definite candidate for the Chosen of Zork.  You can also find the
solution in the commercial hints booklet (yes, we lied a little),
because this particular section remained unchanged when Infocom wrote
Zork III.

You start the end game with your back literally to the wall, and with
only a sword and lamp in your possession.  Go down the steps which lie
before you and proceed north to the room which has the beam of light on
the floor.  "Break beam with sword", go south, and "push button".  Go
back north, take the sword, and continue north until you see the mirror
which has swung open.  "Enter", and take a look around at the very
strange room you have entered.

You are actually in a wooden box which can be made to slide along a long
hallway.  You need to use the box as "cover" in order to avoid being
bludgeoned to death by two stone guardians who are midway down the hall.
If the box shakes, or if the guardians see you, it's curtains.  So be
careful to pay attention to the following directions.

First of all, you need to rotate the box so that it will slide along the
guide channel that's carved in the floor.  There is more than one way to
do that, but all methods start with lifting the short pole so that the
box can rotate.  Do the following:

lift short pole
push red wall
push red wall
lower short pole

At this point, the box is facing north and is firmly anchored to the
slot again so that it won't shake.  Push the mahogany wall three times
(your sword will glow very brightly as you pass the guardians), and then
lift the short pole again.  You want to rotate the box until the pine
wall (which is really a door) is facing north.  Push the red wall until
the compass rose indicates south, and then lower the short pole again.
Push the pine wall, and it will open.  Go north, and you will be facing
a door which the dungeon master must open before you can proceed.

Knock on the door.  The dungeon master will answer it, and will demand
that you answer three questions before you can enter.  The questions are
chosen randomly from the list which follows.  Even if you "mess up", it
turns out that you can give the correct answer long after your time has
supposedly expired.  In other words, you have unlimited time to come up
with the correct answers to three of the following:

  "From which room can one enter the robber's hideaway without passing
   through the cyclops room?"

  "Beside the Temple, to which room is it possible to go from the
   Altar?"

  "What is the absolute minimum specified value of the Zorkmid
   treasures, in Zorkmids?"

  "What object is of use in determining the function of the iced cakes?"

  "What can be done to the mirror that is useful?"

  "The taking of which object offends the ghosts?"

  "What object in the dungeon is haunted?"

  "In which room is the phrase 'Hello sailor' useful?"
 

Once the dungeon master opens the door (and he may never do that if
you've been a complete cheat on your way here), you'll find yourself in
a series of hallways which you want to follow to their northernmost
point. The dungeon master will follow you, but don't let that worry you.
What you need to do is to get to the dial that's at the parapet at the
north end and to use it to control a jail cell which is nearby. To win
the game, do the following:

turn dial to 4
push button
tell master, stay
s
open door
s
tell master, turn dial to 6
tell master, push button
open bronze door
s

You will find yourself in the dungeon master's office, and will in fact
find that YOU are now the dungeon master.  Somehow, it isn't all you
thought it'd be. ...
